---
title:  "Bikesharing in Shanghai"
date:   2017-07-02 17:10:00
description: My experience with bikesharing in Shanghai
---

Millions of people have signed up and actively use shared bikes on apps such as Ofo and Mobike in China, both of which launched last year. The concept is that you are able to pick up any of the share bikes that are left on the street, unlock it with your phone, and start riding. You are then able to park and lock it for someone else to use once you have reached your destination.

For an example of usage, the streets next to our hotel on a recent trip to Shanghai were filled with bikes in morning, and in the evening were almost empty. I suspect people were potentially coming into the area with share bikes for work and taking them to get home.

We signed up to both Ofo and Mobike and tried bikesharing on our recent trip. There were numerous share bikes scattered across the busy roads near our hotel, I counted around 5/6 different brands, including one that was electric (you don't need to pedal).

Firstly, these services seems to be heavily geared towards Chinese nationals rather than tourists (and with a N billion market, why not?). To be able to finally unlock and start riding a bike, you need to be verified through a local chinese mobile number, and you need to pay through one of the two large payments platforms, Wechat or Alipay - whom are able to handle the authentication & payments processing.

You are able to use Ofo directly within the Alipay platform and you can directly scan any Mobike with the Wechat QR code scanner.

However, this meant for a tourist without verification through Alipay or Wechat and without a chinese mobile number it was pretty difficult to unlock one of these bikes.

Both apps require a holding deposit of 299 yuan, and charges something like 1 yuan per hour to rent a bike. For one of the apps we tried it ended up being free due to a promotion, and the other bike cost 2 yuan.

We rode from our hotel in Jing An Temple to The Bund next to the Huang Pu river, which took about 40 minutes - this was about 11pm at night. One thing I noticed was that the drivers here were neutral to bikes, much friendlier than in Sydney. I was not beeped at once, even though we took up the whole right lane - they mostly just overtook us (although some did so quite dangerously).

Final thoughts
I find the scale of what these bike sharing apps have achieved so far very exciting - and so do venture capitalists it seems with some of these companies receiving hundreds of millions of dollars and acheiving potentially multi-billion dollar valuations.

With talk of global expansion (eg. Mobike trialling expansion to the UK), and local companies starting their own ventures such as X and X in Sydney, it will be interesting to see how the bike sharing model can adapt to varying geographies. Interesting considerations may include: road infrastructure (eg. no dedicated bike lanes, narrow streets, nowhere to place bikes), biking culture (eg. driver acceptance), weather etc.
